---
layout: post
title: Midwifery Work
date: 2021-04-18
---

**How were midwives deployed?**

University influence over local governments helped to pass laws that created the expectation that midwives would be licensed, and in some cities, voted into their positions. The local governments and universities used the new regulations to their benefit. For example, midwives were required to get the name of the father of an unwed mother’s baby before delivering the child or giving medical advice or risk losing her license; this was to minimize the number of bastard children born. In effect, this would lessen the tax burden on the city and reduce rates of infanticide. Universities, governments, and other male-dominated institutions used their power to survey how women’s medical work was actively performed. 

Other tasks that midwives performed for the public sector centered on  public morality and municipal welfare. Midwives were expected to report all illegitimate births, who and where the mother was, if the child was alive or dead, and who the father was (if the midwife could find that out). Though morality was an important motivator for municipal involvement, and there was also a significant stigma against unmarried mothers, the real motivator was the cost of supporting bastard children. The Early Modern State was an expensive one, and to combat the burden of illegitimate children, midwives were used as tools of the state. 

In investigations of illegitimate birth, the midwife would inspect the mother as well as look for the corpse of the fetus. Though midwives were the ones tasked with physically inspecting the mother by searching for signs of a recent birth—the presence of milk from the breasts, swollen abdomen, and vaginal discharge—their word was not trusted alone. Most cities prescribed that a barber-surgeon accompany the midwife on her investigation. The barber-surgeon would provide an internal autopsy if deemed necessary as well as validity to the conclusions made by the midwife. The presence of the barber-surgeon represents the increased surveillance characteristic of the Early Modern Era. Females could not be trusted to be honest, and therefore, had to be surveyed during the entire investigation. This surveillance reinforced the power behind the knowledge and expertise of male medical practitioners.

The medical side of midwives’ work in childbirth has been well documented but the practices they performed contained considerable variation based on region, age, religion, and training. The midwife would anoint her hands with some form of oil, usually butter or almond oil, and reach into the vagina in order to lubricate the birth canal for an easier delivery. Midwives also stretched the labia as well and checked and palpated the cervix. During labor, the midwife might also apply “clisters, purges, liniments, poultices, ointments and herbal infusions” to the vaginal opening as a way to induce a quicker delivery and minimize pain. The midwife might also prescribe herbs and other remedies such as ergot to increase contractions and “nettle and shepherd’s purse” to stem hemorrhages. A midwife’s contribution to a woman’s labor led to quicker births, less pain, and better chances of a healthy delivery.
	
Directly after birth, the midwife was responsible for cutting the umbilical cord and swaddling the baby. The midwife would first tie the umbilical cord on the side of the baby and then on the side of the mother with a linen thread. Then she would cut the thread between the two. Midwives were expected to pay particular attention to the umbilical cords of male babies. They were left longer on male babies because the length of the cord was supposed to influence the length of the adult penis. To facilitate this relationship, the midwives would cover the male’s umbilical cord with butter or almond oil and wrap it in a soft cloth. The midwife would also clean all babies with a mixture of water and wine or oil and clear the ears and nose with a cloth.
	
Midwives were called upon to provide certain types of expertise involving female physiology, obstetrics, and infant care. The midwives were compensated for their work as well as for testifying in secular courts. Municipal courts continued to treat midwives well until the bureaucratization of medicine, through guilds, at the beginning of the fifteenth century. Previously the local municipalities held control over the comings and goings of midwives by using their skills to deal with “women’s problems.”  However, ideas regarding female medical practice were formalized by the Catholic and Protestant Churches and male physicians through their own wish to dominate the field of female medicine. 
	
The Catholic Church intervened in midwifery practices due to its concern about infant mortality. Midwives were expected to provide emergency baptism services in the event that a child was stillborn or died soon after birth. Church officials, however, wanted to make sure that the women responsible were honorable and qualified enough to provide such a sacrament.  In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, emergency baptisms performed by midwives became governed by Canon law. The women would judge whether or not the child was close to death and if so perform an emergency baptism or be punished by God. By 1688, in Germany for example, midwives were expected to get permission from a city mayor as well as the bishop before they were authorized to perform emergency baptism services. This regulation shows that male authorities were uncomfortable with the idea of a woman of any class having independent and unrivaled power over the outcome of a child’s eternal soul unless strictly necessary.


<small><small> Source: Staufenbiel, Baylee. "Early Modern Bodies: <em> Ancient Auctoritas</em> and the Western Episteme." ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2019. </small></small>
