---
layout: post
title: Society and Gender in Early Modern London
date: 2021-04-18
---

**What do these proceedings tell us about society and gender in early modern London?**

Male authority was concerned with the growing amount of poor in the greater City of London. There was a gross misunderstanding of the birthing process among judicial and other policing authorities that led to the arrest and trial of many women who simply suffered tragic losses. Environmental and economic factors directly influenced infant mortality. 

Furthermore, it can be inferred that women who might have committed infanticide did so because they could not afford to care for a child in their situations. Though the action is distressing, the structural and institutional factors that caused these women to act on their fears are what is significant. 

For comparison, as birthrates are better documented at the turn of the century: 

Europe during the nineteenth century saw general mortality rates decrease overall, but infant mortality remained high. Infant mortality depended on region, class, and income. Infant mortality in the United Kingdom in 1890 was 150 per 1000 (15%) live births and 170 for France (17%). In 1910 the rate decreased to 105 (10.5%) and 111 (11.1%), respectively.  Interestingly enough, today, there are infant mortality rates of 3.67 in the UK, 3.77 in France, and 5.56 in the United States per 1000 live births. These statistics show that the advent of better medical practices, cleaning, and germ theory influenced mortality rates for the better. 

With this information it can be inferred that many of the child deaths in the early modern era can be attributed to alternative explanations other than infanticide. 


<hr />

<small><small> Rachel G. Fuchs, <em>Gender and Poverty in Nineteenth-Century Europe</em> (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 2005), 45. 
<br>
[Link to UN-Interagency Group for Infant Mortality Statistics](https://childmortality.org/analysis)</small></small>
